Content-Type: text/x-zim-wiki
Wiki-Format: zim 0.4
Creation-Date: 2011-04-01T13:27:37+02:00

====== PosterText ======
Created Friday 01 April 2011

Introduction
Captures and hunts of golden eagles (Aquila chrysaetos) – which,
according to law, in 1939 were still considered noxious animals – were
common in Italy at least until World War Two and led probably to a
tendential reduction of their area of distribution.
However, there are still few data available regarding the actual historical
development of the golden eagle population in the Italian Alps. Here an
attempt is made to depict at least the evolution of the spatial distribution
of golden eagles in Trentino (Fig. 1) in the 20th century.
Golden eagles live in couples, within extensive hunting areas in which
they do not tolerate the presence of other eagles. Each couple owns more
than one nest (3-4 in the average), concentrated in a small part of the
hunting area termed nesting area. The hunting areas' surfaces vary
greatly according to the availability of prey: the mean distance between
the main nests of neighbouring couples in Trentino was, in 1984, of
11,7km. Young eagles instead are not sedentary and move freely over
great distances (Pedrini 1986, 2-4, 49).

Analysis
The references to eagle hunts and captures in the Alps of Trentino
between 1880 and 1930 (Fig. 2) and the censuses of 1954 (brown
dots) and 1983-85 (blue dots) (Fig. 3) have been geo-located,
mapped and compared, as detailed in the Method and sources
section, as to determine the changes in spatial distribution of golden
eagles over time.
Looking at Fig. 3 we can see how over a 30 years period there has
been a certain consistency in the spatial distribution of eagles in
Trentino. In particular three areas present a particularly high and
consistent rate of sightings: the western region of the Parco Naturale
Adamello-Brenta, the Valsugana, immediately at the east of Trento,
and the Val di Fassa, in the extreme north-eastern corner of the
province. No significant data are instead given by the 1954 census
for the north-western Stelvio National Park. Looking at Fig. 2 we can
instead notice how the hunts of the pre-WWII era were concentrated
in the higly anthropised valley around Trento – not so much because
of a greater presence of eagles in that area, but for the increased
chances to be sighted by humans. The distribution pattern shows
however also a good number of eagles hunted at the outskirts of the
three areas mentioned above, proving that there are good chances
that these have historically been the regions within Trentino with a
stable eagle population.

Methods and sources
The available data on eagle sightings, hunts and captures have been
mapped and compared using the QGis software.
The main issue has been the geolocalization of references extracted
from historical documents, which are often ambiguous. To ease the
task the data regarding the hunts since the 19th century and the map
of the census of 1983-85 have thus been extracted from Pedrini
(1986). The data of 1954, gathered from the answers of the local
forestry departments to a survey of the Italian National Research
Council (Direzione regionale dei Servizi Forestali, 1954), located the
eagles giving only place names, and using often obsolete, disused or
plainly wrong toponyms. I have attempted to geolocate and
disambiguate them as precisely as possible using an array of web
sources (e.g. http://www.geonames.org, http://openstreetmaps.org,
http://maps.google.com), personal knowledge of the territory and
cross-references to current and historical descriptions of the area. A
certain grade of inaccuracy and vagueness is however inevitable.
Circles have been drawn around the sighting points as to approximate
the couples' hunting areas; the diametre of the circles has been
calculated on the basis of the observed mean distance between the
nearest neighbours, which resulted to be very similar in the two
datasets. To clean up the 1954 data from false positives and noise,
when the circles overlapped for more than 50% I have assumed that
the sightings referred to nests of the same territorial couple or to a
roving young eagle and have chosen to keep only the median point.

References, Credits and Acknowledgments
Pedrini, Paolo (1986). Indagine sugli accipitriformi e falconiformi (Rapaci diurni) presenti nel Trentino, con
particolare riferimento all’aquila reale (Aquila chrysaetos). Trento.
Direzione regionale dei Servizi Forestali (1954). Indagine statistica sull’Aquila reale. Trento, May 3. IRF/4/130.
Archivio Provinciale di Trento.
Photo of the flying eagle by Chuck Abbe [CC-BY-2.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia
Commons (USA) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Golden_Eagle_flying.jpg
Photo of the Sellajoch by Aconcagua (Own work) [CC-BY-SA-3.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)],
via Wikimedia Commons http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:070406-10_Sellajoch.jpg
This research has been made possible by a PAT2007 postdoc fellowship of the Provincia Autonoma di Trento
