The Danish case is hardly unique. In the United States of America, for example, vast areas are set aside, in the name of nature, as virgin wilderness parks. There is nothing, in and ofitself, that is questionable about setting aside land for parks. Quite the opposite, this is an activity which humans have engaged in to the benefit of flora, fauna, and themselves, for centuries. One should not overlook, however, that these parks too, are scenery in a national drama, preserving the memory ofan era, as Everhart writes, when the 'exemplary virtues ofrugged individualism and free enterprise were the foremost commandments ofManifest Destiny' (I 
ent. The problem here is less a recognition of the symbolic importance of landscape, but rather, the unraveling of the strands which bind ouse' and 'bird' together in our conception ofthe natural environment. The fact that certain landscapes are ofenonnous visual beauty, and the fact that their ition thereby takes on considerable symbolic and emotional importance - which can be vital to the conservation movement as a whole - does not mean lly ofparticular significance to the health ofthe environment as biosphere. F1 
The issue, as I see it, is that both causes are good on their own terrain of )urse. The one is related to vital cultural, and hence abstract, issues ng ideals and norms for the relations within society and between society and its environment, whereas the other involves more concrete issues concerning health ofthe biosphere. The problem is that the first tends to overshadow the second. This happens, for example, when apparently neutral scientific terms ;nvironment, milieu and ecology take on a dual identity, like the dual e'. 1\ ity, like the dual 

Environmental History and the Construction of Nature and Landscape: The Case ofthe 'Landscaping' of the Jutland heath 

KENNETH R. OLWIG 

Environment and History 2 (1996): 15-38 



Abmzzo National Park: Land of Dreams JAMES SIEVERT Environment and History 5 (1999): 293-307 

After centuries of seclusion, Pescasseroli and the upper Sangro River valley in Italy's central Apennine Mountains began opening to the world in the early twentieth century. Spearheading the drive was Ermino Sipari, cousin of the famous philosopher Benedetto Croce. Both Sipari and Croce, who was born in Pescasseroli, believed the natural world could bring great material and cultural benefits to the local population. All it would take was a proper land management structure. After a decade ofdebate in govemment, in the press, and in conservacircles, the result was the inauguration of Abruzzo National Park in 1922. 
Kings and bears are at the origin ofthe national park in Abruzzo. Pescasseroli and " villages in the upper Val di Sangro established a royal hunting reserve in 872, chiefly on the initiative ofErminio Sipari's father, Carmelo and his uncle, ,^ :. Francesco Saverio Sipari. Though g Vittorio Emanuele II planned King Viliunu i^mcmu^^ 1.1. pittimea Fhe hunting reserve was abolished when his successor, |H 'uuunonv-u ‑‑‑.. ..^3 SUUCCsaui, 

The young Sipari launched his political career in 1913 by capturing a seat as a Radical Party. The Radicals had fonneriy acted as a far-left arty to Giolitti's liberal govemment. By the time Sipari won his the Radicals had joined the Giolitti govemment. In adhering to the Radicals, Sipari was carrying on the long Enlightenment-inspired traditions of estors. But he was also grounded in the political traditions of Abruzzo dl, for long a Radical stronghold. Though he was the first Sipari to enter iment, going to Rome was like going to a family reunion. Many extended family members already walked the halls of govemment, including Benedetto Croce. 

itury. Sipari represented a new generation, progressive and modem in outlook, with faith in ng Erminio took his degree at Turin's School of Electrical 's nineteenth-century MIT. When he retumed to Pescasseroli in 1905, he brought the town something Croce's fabled village never had: electncity. Sipari immediately set his skills to work to wire the valley for light. 

Apart from his promise to modemise Pescasseroli, Sipari's electoral platso had an environmental agenda: 'the reforestation of our mountains in order to restore one ofthe most important sources ofthe wealth of y ... Moreover, a gradual appreciation of the richness of our limate must be developed's The corr 

Another important factor inhibiting the park's creation was the local population's scepticism. Luigi Parpagliolo wrote that the words national park sounded strange to Italians.9 S thatthe 'utilitarianspiritofthe masses could not be expected to suddenly respond in favour of the new idea'.'° 

;tion. At a meeting in Rome on November 21,1921, Sipari, together with Pirotta, Parpagliolo and Sarti, formed tion to establish and manage a national park in Abmzzo. Also playing a key role was Italy's most important nature protection group, Pro . As a private organisation, the Abruzzo National Park Agency raised from individuals and leased land from five communities in the Val di Sangro, incluc 

oli. Finally, the park was inaugurated on September 9, 1922. Faced with this fait accompli, the govemment approved legislation to establish the park. In fact, the park's creation received an unexpected boost from e Fascists, newly arrived in Rome. Mussolini wanted to counter the perceived ;tion ofprevious govemments with the appearance ofdynamism for his new regime. The upshot for nature protection was rapid govemment approval ofboth the Gran Paradiso National Park in north-west Italy and the Abruzzo National Park, in late 1922 and early 1923 respectively. 

The way Bertarelli saw national parks was a far cry from the scientific view Vaccari. Bertarelli had long backed the establishment of a nadonal park in Abruzzo. In fact, Touring Club publications were the most important outlet for ming Italians about the purpose of a national park and the necessity of sating one. In an ar In the article, Bertarelli lashed out against the creation of the Abruzzo park. He did not want to see the Val di Sangro and the surrounding mountains become nature sanctuary. Instead, he wanted a national park in Abmzzo to be 'an area of heavy tourist traffic. This just and reasonable aspiration is something to be reached in a very different way than through the burdensome creation of a nationalpark'.14 

ests. The chiefnaturalist of the US Park Service, Ansel Hall, visited the park in 1924. Hall came away impressed, remarking that Italy was far ahead of any other European country in the field of nature protection. The 

wer. In 1924, the Ministry ofPublic Works approved a hydro-electric project within the park, despite the protests of the casseroli municipal govemment and the Abmzzo National Park Agency. Throughout the year 1924, Sipari passionately opposed the plan. He launched a press campaign, lined up a group of MPs against the plan, talked to Mussolini himself. Tl 

park. After a year of intense political jockeying, the govemment reversed its decision. The itement accompanying the new decision said that the artificial lakes would 'render useless the purpose for which the national park was created in the first place.'Furt ice.' Furthermore, the govemment added, no increase in hydro-electric energy image caused by the formation of artificial lakes.17 

Sipari's spirited defence saved the Sangro River. But the battle to defend the ver came at a great political price. He created enough enemies in Rome to cause thp hlnplrino nf his nnminfltinn as senator in 1929. and his eventual exclusion from parliament. With no political clout in Rome, the park agency's freedom to ^ act independently diminished. 

On November 24,1933, Sipari was ousted as park director and the park agency 
shut down. Th i. This dramatic action no longer had as much to do with a political vith Mussolini' s centralist whims. Authority for both ofltaly's assed into the hands of the State Agency for National Forests. 

sless, Sipari remains one ofthe key jres in Italian environmental history. He was the first politician and consereen national parks and regional development. Sipari understood in 1922 - in a way that many national park managers around itly come to learn - that nature protection must involve the needs of local people. Si] Sipari, in fact, had worked out a management and protection plan for decades. He wrote in 1926 that 'Abruzzo National Park, unlike American national parks, created in a short time and funded with millions ofdollars, will take twenty or thirty years to set up. But in the meantime, we will have saved those animals that had been threatened and gradually improved the flora in the area' .*9 The Fascist takeover of the park not only cut short his plan; it decimated it. Publicity activities on behalf of the park Educational services shrank and disappeared. Management was nowhere to be found. 

After 1945, the post-war economic boom transformed every comer of the e dolce vita also meant a sweet flow of cement. The 1950s nrestrained assault on the natural world of the Abruzzo 
By the late Sixties, the park had reached its nadir. There had not even been a park director for six years. But after a hiams of several decades, Sipari's thirtyssion for the park began to take shape a year after his death. In 1969, 


