

Jacoby Note 4

4. 1 he term "environmental bandits" is derived, of course, from the "social bandits" that Eric Hobsbawm first described in his work Primitive Rebels: Studies in Archaic Forms of Social M.ovement in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Century (New York: W.W. Norton, 1959); he developed his concept further in Bandits, rev. ed. (New York: Pantheon, 1981). Hobsbawm's work has spawned a huge literature, too vast to note here. One useful recent review essay, however, is Gilbert Joseph, "On the Trail of Latin American Bandits: A Reexamination of Peasant Resistance," Latin American Research Review 25 (1990): 7-53. 

xvi-xvii
In contrast, environmental historyﾵlike social history, one of the "new histories" that emerged amid the ferment of the 19605ﾵhas remained rooted in the American countryside. The field's practitioners, however, have often found it difficult to step outside the "man/nature" dichotomy prevalent in much of environmental thinking and analyze the complexity within each of these categories. As a result, they have frequently overlooked crimes such as poaching, timber stealing, and arson, which speak not only to the human relationship with nature but also to the distribution of power within human societyﾵof the ability of some groups of humans to legitimize certain environmental practices and to criminalize others.3 
Because of such lacunas, one of my ultimate goals for this study is for it to help erase the current boundaries between social and environmental history. We need a social history that is attuned to rural life and the ecological relationships that shape and sustain it. And we need an environmental history that takes into account social difference and the distribution of power within human society. We need, in short, a history that regards humans and nature not as two distinct entities but as interlocking parts of a single, dynamic whole. 

5-6
What made conservation so controversial in such locales was the fact that it ultimately concerned far more than mere questions of ecologyﾵhow many trees to cut and where, what animals to hunt and for how long. In redefining the rules governing the use of the environment, conservation also addressed how the interlocking human and natural communities of a given society were to be organized. Conservationists might present themselves as dispassionate technicians concerned only with solving neatly confined scientific problems, but their proposals possessed profound social implications. With their emphasis on the need for expert oversight of the environment, conservationists endeavored to concentrate the decision-making power of the state in the hands of a corps of highly trained technocrats. Conservation thus extended far beyond natural resource policy, not only setting the pattern for other Progressive Era reforms but also heralding the rise of the modern administrative state.18 
18. Samuel P. Hays, Conservation and the Gospel of Efftciency: The Progressive Conservation Movement, 1890-1920 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1959), 2-4; Robert H. Weibe, The Search for Order, 1877-1920 (New York: Hill and Wang, 1967), xiii-xiv, 185-86. As Andrew Ross has observed, "Ideas that draw upon the authority of nature nearly always have their origin in ideas about society." Andrew Ross, The Chicago Gangster Theory ofLife: Nature's Debt to Society (New York: Verso, 1994), i: 
It is much harder, of course, to understand the country people who :ontested conservation measures. The writings of such folk are diffuse, their actions frequently cloaked in secrecy. But understanding how these individuals imagined their world and their place in it is no less importantﾵfor, like their opponents, these folk were trying to determine what kind of society they should inhabit and how this society should relate to the natural world around it. That many of the inhabitants of the American countryside came up with a distinctly different set of answers to these questions than did conservationists underscores the divergent visions of the economic and social orderﾵand ultimately of nature itselfﾵthat competed with one another in the United States at the turn of the century. Recent scholarship has done a great deal toward illuminat- 

4
Nonetheless, the "unofficial mind" of rural Americans need not be completely closed to us. There exist a number of often-overlooked sources that can transmit to us the voices of rural folk: court cases, the few newspapers from rural areas, the scattered personal accounts written by country people. These materials can be supplemented by an informed rereading of the documents produced by conservationists. By turning these documents on their heads, as it were, it is possible to peer beyond the main text (the attitudes of conservationists toward nature) to glimpse the counternarrative embedded within (the attitudes of country people toward nature). This counternarrative is perhaps clearest in the various state investigations into lawbreaking in rural areas, which were often little more than official attempts to eavesdrop on the "hidden transcripts" of the local populace.11 

ii. This emphasis on rereading elite documents to understand peasant consciousness has been central to the subaltern school of Indian studies. . See Rana)it Guha, Elementary Aspects of Peasant Insurgency in Colonial India (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1983), 14-17; and Ranajit Guha and Gayatri Chakravortry Spivak, eds., Selected Subaltern Studies (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988). The term hidden transcript comes from the work ofjames Scott on the discourse of resistance. Scott, Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990). 

2-3
"The appreciation of wilderness... appeared first in the minds of sophisticated Americans living in the more civilized East," writes Roderick Nash. "Lumbermen, miners, and professional hunters... lived too close to nature to appreciate it for other than its economic value as raw material."6 Framed in this manner, the history of conservation has become little more than a triumphant tale of the unfolding of an ever-more enlightened attitude toward the environment. The result has been a narrative drained of all moral complexity, its actors neatly compartmentalized into crusading heroes (conservationists) and small-minded, selfish villains (conservation's opponents).7 
6. Roderick Nash, "The Value of Wilderness," Environmental Review 3 (i977): I4-25- For a discussion of the development of environmental history as a distinct discipline and Nash's place in the field, see Richard Whke, "American Environmental History: The Development of a New Historical Field," Pacific Historical Review 54 (August 1985): 297-335
7. As Stephen Fox contends in his history of conservation, "Politics seldom lends itself to such simple morality plays. But environmental issues have usually come down to a stark alignment of white hats and black hats." Stephen Fox, John M.uir and His Legacy: The American Conservation Movement (Boston: Little, Brown, 1981), 103. i 

16
This linkage of an environmental crisis (deforestation and water loss) and a social crisis (urbanism and the undermining of traditional models of masculinity) captures the modern and antimodern impulses that, in neasy combination, lay at the core of the nascent conservation movement. On the one hand, conservation, with its emphasis on using the power of science and the state to rationally manage natural resources, "epresented a quintessentially modern approach toward the environent. On the other, conservation frequently invoked the Romantic arch tor authentic experience, in which nature was offered as the antiote to an increasingly industrial, "overcivilized" existence. These two itions did not necessarily contradict one another; it was possible to be an industrialist during the week and a sports hunter on the weekend (as many of the leading proponents of conservation in fact were). But tensions between the two perspectives would, at times, prove difficult to reconcile. As a 

15
M.an and Nature's unique perspective on the natural world not only made the book a best-seller, it established the text as, in Lewis Mumford's words, the "fountainhead of the conservation movement." Indeed, Marsh's work originated the degradation discourse that would dominate conservationist narratives about landscape change for the next century. The discourse's essential ingredients were a natural world that was stable, predictable, and manageable; a rural populace engaged in "unwise" environmental practices that would have potentially catastrophic ecological consequences if left unchecked; and an interventionist state armed with technical and administrative expertise. Combined with one another, these narrative elements formed the central story of conservationﾵa tale that prophesied imminent ecological doom, unless natural resources were removed from local control and placed in the hands of scientifically trained governmental managers.10 A 
io. Lewis Mumford, The Brown Decades: A Study ofthe Arts in America, 1865-1895 (New York: Dover, 1955), 78. Among those conservationists to acknowledge their debt to Marsh are Fernow, who wrote of "George P. Marsh's classical book," in Our Forestry Problem (n.p., 1887), 3; and Andrew Fuller, Practical Forestry (New York: Orange Judd, 1900), 14. I have borrowed the term "degradation discourse" from James Fairhead and Melissa Leach, M;sreading the African Landscape: Society and Ecology in a Forest-Savanna M.osaic (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 292-93. James C. McCann employs a similar termﾵ"degradation narratives"ﾵin "The Plow and the Forest: Narratives of Deforestation in Ethiopia, 1840-1992," Environmental History 2. (April 1997): 138-59, while Vasant K. Saberwal has recently traced the rise of a "desiccationist discourse" in Anglo-American conservation. Saberwal, "Science and the Desiccationist Discourse of the Twentieth Century," Environ?nt and History 4 (October 1998): 309-43. Fairhead and Leach revisit their argument in Reframing Deforestation: Global Analyses and Local Realities: Studies in West Africa (New York: Routledge, 1998). 

1
Of all the decisions any society must make, perhaps the most fundamental ones concern the natural world, for it is upon earth's biotaﾵ its planrs, animals, waters, and other living substancesﾵthat all human existence ultimately depends. Different cultures have approached this challenge in different ways, each trying to match their needs for natural resources with their vision of a just and well-ordered society. T 

Notes 1-2
i. Richard H. Grove, Green Imperialism: Colonial Expansion, Tropical Island Edens, and the Origins of Environmentalism, 1600-1860 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995), z. There is a long list of scholarly studies that seek to understand the natural world by focusing on a few well-placed figures. Among the most prominent of such works are Roderick Nash, Wilderness and the American Mind, yd ed. (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1982); Barbara Novak, Nature and Culture: American Landscape and Painting, 1825-1875 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1980); Max Oelschlaeger, The Idea of Wilderness: From Prehistory to the Age ofEcology (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991); Patricia Nelson Limerick, Desert Passages: Encounters with the American Deserts (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1985); Leo JVtarx, The M.achine 
in the Garden: Technology and the Pastoral Ideal in America (New York: Oxford University Press, 1964); John F. Reiger, American Sportsmen and the Origins of Conservation, rev. ed. (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1986); and Donald Worster, Nature's Economy: A History ofEcological Ideas, znd ed. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994). 
2. Having begun this study with the sense that I was voyaging alone into uncharted territory, I have been pleased to encounter several fellow explorers of conservation's hidden history along the way. Louis Warren studies poaching in The Hunter's Game: Poachers and Conservationists in Twentieth-Century America (New Haven: Yale University P r Press, 1997); Mark Spence focuses on the impact that the park movement had on American Indians in Dispossessing the Wilderness: The Preservationist Ideal, Indian Removal, and National Parks (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999); Richard Judd attempts to place rural New Englanders at the forefront of the conservation movement in Common Lands, Common People: The Origins of Conservation in Northern New England (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1997); and Ben Johnson explores the effect of conservation on working-class immigrants in "Conservation, Subsistence, and Class at the Birth of Superior National Forest," Environmental History 4 (January 1999): 80-99. 




