Conflict and conservation. Which geographic scale for the history of nature conservation in the Alps?

     
     At its beginnings nature conservationism was mainly a national issue, related in first place to national ideologies and politics. This national dimension, in parallel to an international ideological movement born in the US and developed then also in Europe, impacted on the diverse approaches adopted in different countries: thus, parks presented often ideological similarities but national specificities.
     
     But national parks and nature reserves were also local enterprises with a strong impact on the local communities and on the way they interrelated with the natural world. In particular, to cut out a portion of territory and define it a nature reserve may have an evident impact on local economic interests and cause conflicts between the local communities and the state or the nature conservationists, even before a park is officially constituted. Writing their history requires thus also to adopt the methods of historical microanalysis. To obtain a complete understanding of the practical and theoretical development of nature preservation it is thus essential to look at all these four geographical scales: international debate, national policies, transregional comparison, local conflicts and practices. 
     
     In this context what I mean by trans-regional history is to compare different regions interpreted as subnational administrative and cultural areas, rather than supranational macro-areas encompassing various nations as in the usual interpretation. 
     SLIDE 
     
     The Alps are one of the main European geographical features, an exemplary transnational space, encompassing six major countries (France, Italy, Switzerland, Germany, Austria, Slovenia). Moreover, the Alpine region includes very diverse cultural enclaves, micro-environmental features, and socio-economic conditions.  In this sense it may be seen as a paradigmatic area to test the usefulness of a trans-regional approach.
     
     The character of Alpine countries is one of radical variation in climate and in both altitude and aspect of the land. In detail, each valley and even mountain slope, has different ecosocial conditions and an overarching analysis can be made only with difficulty at the national or merely transnational level.  The Alps need, in fact, to be considered first from a micro-historical point of view, that evolves then to a trans-regional scale, before heading towards a truly international perspective.  The larger scale is not a generalization of the smaller scale – a generalization that loses or somehow misrepresents the details. Each scale measures something different, and each scale shows particular elements of the story to be told. (citation of email)
      
     Only the adoption of a trans-regional approach as a necessary intermediate step makes it possible to understand fully which elements promoted and hindered the development of nature conservation in different countries and regions. In fact, differences are often greater within the Alps of one single nation (for example the Italian western and eastern Alps present radically different conditions of settlement) than between adjoining valley or regions separated by some political or administrative border. 
     
     SLIDE  - State of nature conservation before WWII. The timeframe of my analysis focuses on the origins of Alpine nature conservation, thus essentially on the period before WWII (cause of border design)
     
     SLIDE  - Evolution of parks in the Alpine area (current state)
     
     The macroregions I am looking at are essentially two: the western Alps around the border between France and Italy (SLIDE ) and the eastern Alps between Germany, Austria and Italy (SLIDE ). Moreover, as a means of comparison, I am looking at the Italian national dimension, which overlaps both the regions, and at the overall situation of the Alpine range (SLIDE ).
     
     SLIDE  
     The first Alpine national park, founded between 1909 and 1914, and the one that has probably set the standard of early alpine nature conservation has been the Swiss one. . The park was intended to pursue a policy of total conservation, where any human activity was banned: pasture, forestry, hunting and fishing rights of use were thus simply cancelled. Nonintervention into natural processes was the parks mantra. It should not be in any way a recreational space, but rather an area where to study the “natural” development of environmental processes.
     
     SLIDE 
     As regards the Western Alps we will look at the two first parks that were founded in the region, both also the first in their respective countries: the La Berarde in France and the Gran Paradiso in Italy.
     
     The first attempts to set up a national park around the La Bérarde peak, both to foster tourism and reduce the impact of environmental degradation, were made already before WWI under the impulse of national and local Alpine clubs. Land was bought and leased by the state from the municipality of Saint-Christophe, which was however, it is reported, more in need of cash than enthused by the idea of nature protection as such. This probably led it to underestimate the consequences a national park, that, notwithstanding the plans for tourism improvement, was supposed to work under a total conservation rule as the Swiss one, could have on the local economy and to its customary rights of use. The park however was set up just de facto, and no legal commitments, financial means, or administrative structures existed to manage the area. The state simply bought and/or rented land, and the conservation movement dubbed it France's first national park. It must also be noticed that the area was made up mainly by unproductive land. 
     The outbreak of WWI stopped then the attempts to give a legal framework to this acquisition. The virtual park was managed by then by the water and forests administration as any other of its possessions, not even knowing exactly what to do with the area. Nonetheless this state administration worked during the 1920s to enlarge the protected area, buying and renting, again from money-starved municipalities, new pastures and introduced also the first form of armed surveillance (1921). 
     SLIDE
     In Italy at least six proposals were made, again mainly by the Alpine and touring clubs, before WWI and in the very first years after it for parks in the Alpine and preAlpine region: Mount Argentera, Livigno, Adamello Brenta, Eastern Trentino, the Venetian Alps, the Karst (and most of them have been, much, later actually been founded at least as regional natural parks)
     
  Italy’s first park, however, had a quite particular history, that sets it apart both from the near French experience and from the other Italian alpine park. The establishment in December 1922 of the Gran Paradiso National Park was due not so much to pressures of the early conservation movement or of tourism association, which did not file any official proposal for the creation of a park in the region, but to the 1919 decision of King Vittorio Emanuele III to donate his hunting reserve and tenancies on the Gran Paradiso massif to the State for the preservation of ibex either in form of a national park or of a state hunting reserve. 
  
  The early history of the Gran Paradiso National Park was characterized by conflicts between local communities and the park administration over land-use issues, in particular with respect to the transformation of hunting from a right, sold by the mountain-dwellers to the King, into a crime, forbidden by the state without compensation. Nonetheless, conflicts notwithstanding, the early park administration was very effective and was able to set up a good working compromise with the local communities and to actually promote nature conservation. Crisis came only after 1933 when the park administration was centralised by the fascist regime and the park lost most of its effectiveness in preserving the local ibex population.
  
  TRANSREGIONAL SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES
  
  SLIDE
  
  Issues of national identity, combined, with a drive towards the promotion of mountaineering and tourism, may be cited as motives for the creation of the fourth and last park set up under Fascist rule in Italy in 1935: the Stelvio National Park, our first example in the Eastern Alps.
  Only a minimal role was played here, in opposition to the western Alpine cases, in the decision to create this park by the fact that the area hosted one of the last red deer colonies of the central Alps, or in general by considerations regarding wildlife and conservation. 
  
  Those who promoted the park were mainly interested in the area’s scenic beauty. 
  Moreover, if the whole Alps had always been seen in Italy as the guards of the fatherland, more so was the case in the recently annexed area of Trentino-Alto Adige, which until less than twenty years before had been subjected to Austrian rule. The Stelvio park, besides a cherished destination for mountaineers and ramblers, could thus also be seen as a symbol of both Italian nation and nature in an area that represented the country’s cultural, linguistic and political border. 
     
     SLIDE
     
  The Stelvio National Park, on the border between German and Italian speaking areas, just straddles the WWI front-line, and was the scenery for some of the most important high mountain battles in history. It maybe thus seen also as a sort of natural war memorial, one of the aspects that was mainly brought forward by the supporters of its creation in the Italian Alpine Club.
  The symbolic value of the Stelvio as national border and as tourism destination were placed in such a high regard  that no real conservation policy was set in place within the park; for example hunting and fishing were not limited in any particular way. This seems to have reduced the conflicts (with the exception of the German speaking population which saw the park as an Italian imposition) between the park and the local population, since, in the end, Stelvio National Park, under Fascist rule and until the early 1950s when at last implementing regulations for the founding law were drafted, was not much more than its borders. The park seems to have lacked any mission and land-use philosophy that went beyond tourism promotion. Undeniably, it lacked the means to implement its statutory conservation tasks. 
  
  SLIDE
  
     As regards the Austrian (and German) side of the border the “Verein Naturschutzpark” was founded in 1909, seeing itself as a trans-national, pangerman, if very elitist, association: its plans for a German Alpine national park aimed at preserving a large area in the Austrian Alps, not far from the Italian border. In particular after WWI, in parallel to the Italian redrafting of alpine mythologies the Alps came to symbolize the pan-German national character and its strength.
     Even before the VN was founded negotiations were started to buy 144km2 near Schladming, on the Styrian border. However, word-of-mouth led the local communities to get to know about the project and the prices to skyrocket, leading to the definite abandonment of the project. Only in 1913 the VN was able to buy about 10Km2 in the Hohe Tauern of Salzburg.
     As in the Italian and French cases a leading role in the preservation of the Alpine landscapes was played by the Alpine club. In 1918 the German Austrian Alpine Club received in donation 40 Km2 in the carinthian Glockner region, around the Pasterze glacier, with the aim to set up a national park, and twenty years later 280 km2 on the Tyrolian side of the range. Thus by the mid 1930s the DöaV owned the Grossglockner peak. 
     
     As a reminder of the importance of a developing tourism industry it should be reminded that in the same years (1935) the Grossglockner High Alpine Road was opened, opening the area that was supposed to become the national park to mass tourism  (parallel to Stelvio) and which had also a role in the reconstruction of Austrian national identity as the Alpenrepublik. Already in 1939 a project was made for the constitution of a Hohe Tauern National Park that however was not crowned with success because of the beginning of WWII. Notwithstanding great social and political pressure between the 1950s and 1970s the national park was actually founded, as a joint endeavour of the Kärnten, Tirol and Salburg states, only during the 1980s and 1990s. 
     
     TRANSREGIONAL SIMILARITIES BETWEEN STELVIO AND HOHE TAUERN
     
One major issue to notice are the diverse approaches adopted in different countries and the different role of conflict between urban elites and local communities.
French case: the local communities attempted to exploit the elites and state desire to protect nature selling and renting their landscapes
Italian case: great regional differences. 
Austrian case: in the historical phase conflict was avoided through acquisition, rather than lease or alienation. In one case the greed of local communities led a park not to be created (compare French case)
The French case poses an exception because the Alps, as far as I know, did not obtain a role as symbol of the nation as it did, almost naturally, in Switzerland and post WWI Austria, but also in non exclusively alpine countries such as Italy and Germany.
Main aim nature conservation in the western Alps and tourism promotion on the Austro-Italian border, but cause maybe timescale and not geog scale. An issue I would like to put up for debate

Transregional similarities and difference become even clearer looking at the Alps through the lens of demographic development in the areas that over time have become parks.
SLIDE
SLIDE
French case: fear of depopulation as form of criticism of parks
As regards population trends in many cases the park areas show population trends that follow those of the neighbouring municipalities
Italian case: huge regional differences: in the period of reference West w/ France East w/ Austrua
Austrian case: probable trend of tourism development.

STRESS SIMILARITIES BTW FRENCH AND WESTERN ITALIAN CASE AND BETWEEN AUSTRIAN /GERMAN AND STELVIO CASE AND DIFFERENCES BETWEEN EASTERN AND WESTERN ITALY
